From: Drew Crawford <drew@sealedabstract.com>
Subject: Re: On "Why mobile web apps are slow"
To: Taylan Ulrich B. <taylanbayirli@gmail.com>
Date: Sun, 8 Sep 2013 20:22:22 -0500 (1 day, 16 hours, 55 minutes ago)

I share your concern for the level of discussion, although perhaps for
different reasons. I will only bother responding to one point, as it
is the one that you seemed to take the greatest offense to, and your
reaction was largely unintelligible to me:

    It is what garbage collectors do, by definition, to collect
    objects
    which they can *prove* to be no longer accessible. The halting
    problem
    only has implications on static analysis, which is the entire
    reason
    garbage-collection is a run-time feature, unlike for example ARC
    which
    works through static analysis only and thus cannot break cyclic
    references that appear at run-time. So it looks like you're
    unaware of
    the fundamental workings of garbage-collection, yet write a whole
    article on it and pretend to be smart. I was hoping that even the
    most
    blatant mistakes in your article are due to the unintentional
    cherry-picking and blindness induced by your bias regarding this
    topic,
    but comes out it's nothing else than ignorance.

A proof of my position is given in Morrisett, Felleisen, and Harper's
"Abstract Models of Memory Management" as Proposition 3.4. Although I
am quite certain the proof is much older; it is the sort of thing that
anyone with a solid grasp of computation theory would be able to see
in a few minutes.

We are faced with some possibilities here. Either it is the case that
Morrisett, Felleisen, and Harper are incorrect, which I think can be
rejected out of hand. Then there is I think the most generous outcome
for you in which you misunderstand my statement to be something other
than Proposition 3.4, and so perhaps "my" position (which is of course
your misunderstanding of my position rather than my actual position)
might indeed be a very ignorant position, but that is hardly my fault.
Finally there is the possibility that you have correctly understood my
claim and are just incorrect on the logic.

Whichever case we are in, this is not the time for personal attacks.
Well, it is never time for personal attacks, so it is bad for that
reason, no matter what sort of silly argument I have presented. But it
is especially not time for personal attacks when the position has both
a formal proof behind it and the support of respected scholars. It
would be the time to mount a very serious argument on the merits, that
would require a great deal of best effort, and even then given the
level of opposing support is realistically likely to fail.

But instead you definitely doubled down on your bet that I am an
ignorant person. Which I probably am, so it isn't a bad bet; but the
position in question is certainly not ignorant (cf. it has both a
proof and academic support), so that fact is not particularly relevant
to the question. At any rate, we seem to have a pretty fundamental
disconnect about how to have a proper argument. Certainly further
discussion on the topic of garbage collectors is not going to shed any
light on that problem.
